StayZilla was a homestay platform launched in and primarily based out of India. It operated on a very similar concept that of AirBnB in the United States: patrons would offer up their homes or properties for short-term bookings by paying strangers online. StayZilla was reasonably successful in India and at one time employed several hundred staff members, making this dataset a good way of peeking into the Indian lodgings market. In this notebook we will explore properties offered on StayZilla. We will probe the basic dataset attributes and hopefully uncover some interesting effects from the data! This exploratory data analytics notebook is recommended for beginners and those interested in probing this dataset further. Feel free to fork this notebook and/or copy the code here and explore further on your own!  First, as always, we need to do a little bit of elbow-grease work standardizing and splitting out fields. Let's start by examining a breakdown of some core attributes. Surprisingly, the vast majority of the properties on the site are not homes but (self-described) hotels. This is a prominent difference between StayZilla and the US equivalent, AirBnB, which does not allow (explicit) hotels in its listings. Hotels are subject to a raft of legal oversights that listing on a homestay platform sidesteps, a fact which has led to huge and very public fights between AirBnB and many of the US cities it operates in; evidently this is much less of or not even a concern in India. Room prices are heavily right-skewed to a handful of extravegantly prized luxury listings. Some of these listings may even actually be fake! The vast majority of offerings on the platform are in the 500-to-4000 per night rupee range, with a center at 1000 rupees. Adult occupancies and child occupancies allowed closely mirror one another. The vast majority of properties on the StayZilla platform are unverified. Where are the StayZilla properties located? In the chart above, the bigger the circle, the more properties are listed in the city with the given location. Most properties are located in northern India, which appears to be where the platform is most popular. India is a huge country, so it's plausible that this shows that the StayZilla platform is far more popular in northern India than in the south. Let's briefly examine what amenities are available on-location. We'll start by taking a quick look at the volumes of the top 10 contenders: Next, let's see whether or not the presence of an amenity has an identifiable effect on price. Overall, and somewhat surprisingly, we see that the amenities listed for a location has a weak effect on price. The only price effect that is maybe statistically significant is the presence of a bar. Why is this even an option, given that we're taking about a homesharing website? Because the website is mostly inunduated with hotel listings after all! That's all here folks! To trek onwards, perhaps try out some of the following things: 