Yellow pages is a long-running directory for services that has been published in one form or another since the late 19th century. These phone directories are stereotypically published in a large book filled with thin yellow sheets of paper, hence the name. Each page of which would list hundreds of phone numbers for lawyers, doctors, dentists, handmen, and ordinary people. This dataset is a subset of yellow pages listings for restuarants in the United States. It is taken from The Real Yellow Pages, a phone directory publisher (one of several using the name "Yellow Pages") formerly owned by AT&T. Todays these services have fallen to the wayside in favor of applications like Yelp!, but phone directories nevertheless march on. In this notebook we will explore the Yellow Pages restaurants dataset. We'll look at what categories of restaurants are popular in the United States and, briefly, what restaurant domains on the web look like. We will probe the basic dataset attributes and hopefully uncover some interesting effects from the data! This exploratory data analytics notebook is especially recommended for beginners. Feel free to fork this notebook and/or copy the code here and explore further on your own! The Categories fiend in this dataset concatenates a wealth of different restaurant categories into a comma-separated list. We should "unroll" this data into a set of Yes/No bool fields so that we can manipulate restaurant categories more easily.. There are a lot of categories! We will give each of these categories its own field in the dataset. This greatly increases the dimensionality of our dataset. [*] w.r.t. the sample provided, which is biased towards the Eastern Seaboard. The twenty most common restaurant food categories is informative. This chart is, approximately, what the average American taste in food looks like. Note that categories are not exclusive: a coffee shop that also serves breakfast will be given both categories. Shops are most commonly in more than one category, most commonly 2 but averagely more than 3. With 3.2 categories on average, and >250 categories overall, the classification is still extremely sparse. We can use the missingno package as a tool to visualize how sparse: Note that the long streaks in the dataset nullity values are evidence of some kind of artifact in the way that this data was collected by PromptCloud. If we can't explain where the "streakiness" comes from, it may be a concern when it comes time to, say, build an ML model on this data. We can build a dendrogram to see what categories go together. In the chart below, food categories that go together often are located close to another. The smaller the distance between the "splits" in the levels on the chart, the more likely restaurants with either of those categorizations are to have both categorizations. So for example, we see that (unsurprisingly) "Chinese Restauraunts" are almost always also "Asian Restaurants". Next, let's try and break restaurant categories down by location. The number of restaurants sampled by state is weird. These states are all on the Eastern side of the country, for one. For another, we don't have a proportionatly representative sample: the number of restaurants in Georgia is definitely ont one-twentieth of the restaurants in Indiana, for example! Oftentimes this sort of odd distribution is again evidence of an artifact in the data collection. Let's press on. Let's take a peek at differences in the kinds of restaurants available in the different states. We'll take the states with the three largest sample sizes in the data, and break things down into percentages: "restaurants per capita" with respect to the population of restaurants, if you will. In the chart above, restaurants that are more popular in Indiana than in Florida are positive in number, while restaurants more popular in Florida than Indiana are are negative. Indiana has more fast food restaurants per capita! These differences are fairly small in absolute magnitude however, only making up plus-minus 0.3% of the total number of restaurants. Pennsylvania, meanwhile, has more bakeries and coffee shops than Indiana does. This dataset includes a text field for emails. There are a couple of interesting things we can extract from this. First of all, what URL endings are usually used? Not surprisingly, dot-com wins by a lot. Second, what starter words (before @) are used? Note that some of these, like ddkidzone, are specific to specific chains, however (Dunkin' Donuts, in this case). Still, it's interesting to see that info is the overall winner, by a lot. That's all here, folks! To explore further, try exploreing the category field further. 