
    Wherever there are probabilities, there are pseudo-random
    number generators. RNGs generate nominally random numbers but can be made deterministic by passing a "random
    seed". Though the output looks random to us, it's easily reproducible—as long as you use the same
    seed, the output will be the same. This makes debugging probabilitic algorithms much easier, and since probabilities
    are everywhere, random seeds are too.
 
    The trouble is that random seeds are fixed numbers (they serve no purpose otherwise), which means that get
    picked by humans, and humans are terrible random number generators. Here, try it yourself!. What's worse, random seeds
    are chosen not just by humans but by programmers, indiviudals who like to think that they are quirky and
    different but oftentimes quirk and differentiate themselves right back into their own peculiar mean.
 
    Case in point: the number 42, the "ordinary, smallish number" chosen by English writer Douglass Adams to be
    "the Answer to the Ultimate Question of Life, the Universe,
    and Everything" in the science fiction series "Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy". But if you are reading this
    blog you probably already know that—the series is a cultural touchstone of the dog-eared programmer of the
    day. Even Python BDFL (benevolent dictator for life, a term commonly endowed to the creator of a popular
    programming language—see what I mean?) Guido van Rossum has
    been known to name-drop it from time to time.
 
    I was curious what random seeds people were choosing for their programs, and where the number 42 would rank.
 
    Popular code-hosting website GitHub recently announced a searchable
    Google BigQuery index of all of the contents of all open source code that they host, and this was a perfect
    opportunity to give it a whirl.
 
    I threw the following query at the Google BigQuery interface:
 
    And, a small amount of
    processing later, here are the top 20 results:
 
    Fascinating!
 
    You can see the full output on GitHub.
 