This notebook is an exploratory analysis of the chess games provided in this dataset. We will take a peak at and try to understand all of the fields. The number of turns taken per game follows a normal distribution with a small positive skew towards longer games. Games are 60 turns long on average. Note that for the purposes of this variable, each player move is a turn. Most games end with a player resigning. It seems that many players do not stick around for the mate, prefering to insteal move on to the next game. White famously has a slight first-mover advantage in chess, as demonstrated here. This variable controls the timer that the game is played under. In timed chess games (most online chess games are timed, for obvious reasons) each player is afforded a time basis (10 minutes, 15 minutes, etc.) awarded at the beginning of the game and an increment (15 seconds etc.) awarded every time a turn starts. If the player runs the clock out, they lose the game. This field is populated by strings in the form 15+2. The first number, 15, is the time basis in minutes; the second number, 2, is the increment in seconds. Ratings are normally distributed. The opening_eco variable is the control code from the Encyclopedia of Chess Openings for the opening in question, basically an ID code for the human-readable name historically assigned to the opening and contained in opening_name. Openings are sequences of moves by both black and white at the beginning of a chess game that are well-known enough to be "in the book". At the present time effectively every possible sequence of opening moves has been studied. In this dataset openings are provided with the following naming convention: Name of Opening: Basic Variation Name | Continuation Name | Continuation Name Hence some example values are: You can see the kinds of values provided in this field for yourself: The Van't Kruijs Opening is actually a highly irregular opening move, but appears first in this list for ontological reasons. Common lines, like the Sicilian Defense, are provided with a variety of variations. Uncommon lines, which have been less studied, and therefore have fewer variations named, will appear more often in a value count simply because they haven't been "broken up" as much. Splitting off the subcategories we get something that is much more in line with what we expected: opening_ply is an interesting field because it states to how many moves the studied opening line holds. For example, note that in the follow 5-ply Sicilian Defense games, the opening sequence is always e4 c5 Nf3 d6 d4. ply is a term from game theory. A single ply is an identifiable unit of play which shifts the game's decision tree. In chess, this is every single move, that is, every time a piece is moved and the turn is passed to another player. See the Wikipedia article for more details. Algebraic notation is a format for describing a sequence of chess moves. In algebraic notation the board is divided into a grid, of ascending letters and numbers. Every piece besides the pawn gets a letter. So for example  e4 c5 Nf3 means "white pawn to e4, then black pawn to c5, then white knight to f3. And so on. Check out the Wikipedia article on algebraic notation. 