We have a reasonable expectation that the more trips a bike stop has that end or begin at that station, the greater the amount of seconds total that bikes will spend going to or from that station. However, I think it's also reasonable to wonder how strongly that effect holds across the bikeshare system. I can imagine, for example, that there are stations which are naturally further away from origin points for bikers than peer stations elsewhere in the system which are closer. In New York City, a prominent example might be bike stops in Brooklyn versus bike stops in Manhattan: because bike stops in Brooklyn require crossing the bridge out of Manhattan to get there, they take longer to get to. Similarly popular bike stops in Manhattan, meanwhile, are easier to get to, because they're just "an avenue away" from most other bike stops, and never involve rerouting to cross a bridge. But would stations like that have a significant effect on the system overall? Given that most stations are located in Manhattan, and most trips occur within the borough the bike rack is located in, I suspect not. Let's use the Spearman Correlation Coefficient to find out! The Spearman correlation coefficient is a summary measurement that we can throw at any dataset and get a number back on. As a member of the class of measurements known as "correlation coefficients", it has the following three properties: The Spearman is the second most popular measurement for correlation, after Pearson's R (the subject of a different notebook that's also well worth reading!). In fact, Spearman correlation is just Pearson's R, reformulated using variable ranks instead of raw variable values! Mathematically it can be stated thusly. Suppose that we have two vectors of variable values, $X$ and $Y$. Let $rk$ be a function which assigns each value in either matrix its rank: that is, the position each $X_i$ or $Y_i$ value would occupy in the list of all values. Let $\sigma_\cdot$ be the standard deviation of a vector. Then the Spreaman correlation coefficient is: Although it looks a bit more complicated, all we've done is replaced the $x_i$, $y_i$, $\bar{x}$ (mean), and $\bar{y}$ values with their ranked equivalents. For slightly more context on the math and why it works, see the Pearson notebook. Because of the rank-transformation incurred, Spearman measures something different than Pearson. The ideal Spearman function is one that is monotonically increasing. That is, every increased rank-value in the X by exactly 1 ought to increase the rank-value in the Y by exactly 1. Variables don't "skip around". As long as this holds true, the rank-transform will create a straight line (coordinate (44, 44) leads to (45, 45) leads to (46, 46) and so on), and the correlation measurement that gets applied afterwards will return exactly 1 (or exactly -1 if the underlying data is monotonically decreasing). For example, here's a dataset which has a perfect Spearman correlation of 1:  Notice that the Pearson correlation, though high, is less than 1, because this dataset has a non-linear (polynomial) underlying distribution. Here's a hand implementation of the coefficient (I'm reusing the Pearson formula from earlier!). Spearman correlation is the ideal test for the problem that we are interested in studying in this dataset: the extent to which more time means more trips. In an ideal world where bike stations are equivalently distributed in terms of the average distance a commuter has to travel to get there, the number-of-trips to total-time-spent-traveling relationship for our bike stations would be monotonic. Will that relationship most hold for the Montreal bikeshare system? If we plot out the values, here's what we see. However, due to the huge number of points in the dataset, the scatter taken alone is a little misleading: just take a look at the histograms on either side, which show most of the points are in the first handful of pixels at the bottom of the plot. If we take and plot the ranks, things get much tighter: And it's the correlation on those ranks that the Spearman coefficient measures. Here's the result that we get: Our hypothesis is right! The number of rides at a bike stop is almost totally predictive of the number of commuter seconds spend riding to it. The Spearman correlation coefficient is a good summary statistic to use in this quick test, because it gets at the fact that what we're interested in is not the precise linear relationship between the variables but with where they "fall" overall. There are other ways of poking about in this data for this information, of course; the Spearman is just one (useful!) way to do it that gets you one number at the end you can look at. There's one important practical advantage the Spearman coefficient has over the Pearson coefficient: it's more resistant to outliers, because during the rank-rating step the distance between the outliers and the rest of the distribution gets shrunk dramatically (to being merely the "top" or "bottom" points). This graphic via Wikipedia demonstrates this well:  This means that it's also interesting to examine the difference between the Spearman and Pearson correlation coefficient for relatively linear data: that number will give you a sense of how much variable correlation you're losing (and how much worse a naive regression will fair) due to outliers! 