I briefly spoke of my involvement with the Wikipedia Signpost earlier in
        my blog post essay on the negotiation between Openness and Quality in the
        Wikimedian movement. My involvement with the Signpost has dampened somewhat lately: I've been busy
        with other projects and haven't had as much time as I did in the past to write articles. I still participate
        in the editorial board and still read every issue, of course, but more of my work is in the secondary
        technical elements of the newspaper. You can see the list of every article I've contributed here.
     
       The Signpost, like the English Wikipedia that hosts it, is an organic entity that has come about as a
        result of over a decade of steady innovation. By the time I became active again there in early 2015 its
        internal organization had descended into an unfortunate maelstrom of half-active pages, unused template code,
        and decade-old discussions still nested into hidden talk pages that hadn't been visited by actual human in
        years. I took it upon myself to refresh the project's technical organization, a lengthy singular effort that
        took months of slow progress to complete. I created
        content guidelines, fixed the layout
        (with guidelines!),
        reworked the default templates we use for creating articles, constructed a new submission
        queue, wrote coordination
        guidelines, wrote a technology report republication
        script, wrote a featured content publication
        script (saving us at least an hour of work every week), wrote a Blog Importer webtool on Wikimedia Labs (saving us at least 20 minutes
        every time we republish something), and introduced interactive polls and indexing into our
        stories. All a labor of love, usually during school hours no less...
     
        Continuing along with that theme, this week I put together a Jupyter
        notebook analyzing page view information for Signpost stories using the new (incredibly long overdue)
        pageview API. We on the
        Signpost board have for ages now wanted to run some analysis on our stories to see what it is that
        readers like the most and the least so that we can better target our publication efforts, and now I've
        finally gone and done it. The key takeaways are:
     
        I presented a lightning talk on this topic at yesterday's 
        NYC Wikipedia Day 2016 celebratory conference: the video is below. You can see the
        data for yourself on GitHub.
     
        Addendum: I extended this analysis a bit further by looking at spikes in Signpost viewership due to
        links from popular websites. You can read all about it here.
     