If the Internet is to be believed, Elon Musk is the smartest person in the universe. Musk is a South African -born, Silicon Valley -raised technology CEO and innovator who juggles managing a portfolio of half a dozen innovate companies of (or involving) his own making: Tesla, SpaceX, Solar City, OpenAI etcetera. His greatest ambition at the moment? No less than to put man on Mars. Musk engages on Twitter very heavily. To start with, let's look at his Tweet patterns in time. Unlike a certain president, Musk actually spaces his tweets out quite a bit. He only tweets at least once every three days or so. Surprisingly (but unsurprisingly also), Musk's tweets do not quite go silent in the dead of night. While his 4 AM tweet volume is nowhere near where it is at midday, it never stops! It does seem like his Tweet volume is going up over time. Now let's look at some structural tweet characteristics. Musk retweets only one in six times. When he does, he strongly favors his companies, NASA, and Wired Magazine. A quarter of Musk tweets include URLs... ...while a third tag or are replies to other users. How's that for engaging with a billionare! Who gets this privilege? There are some interesting names here. John Carmack is a genius in his own right (now at Oculus, famous in the 90s for having been the principal programmer on DOOM). Fredric Lambert is editor of a specialty eletric vehicle car magazine, while Phil Plaite (@BadAstronomer) is Internet famous. Neat! Just for fun, let's see what we can dig up with a super-simple word tokenization on these tweets. What does Elon Musk think about various topics de jour? Let's see straight from the source! That's all folks! Hopefully this kernel gives you a good sense of what this dataset is like. To explore further, I highly recommend trying to throw some actual NLP techniques at this dataset. What do you get when you do TF-IDF, for example? And if you really want to have fun, try building a classifier to distinguish Musk tweets from Trump tweets. If I don't do it first! 