These notes are a long hard look at Bitcoin, prompted by the fact that I have homework in the shape of writing about an aspect of Bitcoin. This section based on the canonical Blockchain demo. Q: How big is the Bitcoin blockchain? A: As of late 2019 it is ~250 GB. Every new block was about 1 MB, and verifying a new block on a single node takes about 30 seconds and about 1.25 GB of memory (numbers from a 2017 article). The new block creation rate is about 50 GB per year. Q: Do you really have to keep the entire transaction log locally? A: In Bitcoin, yes; there is no way to know that a newly seen transaction is valid without scanning backwards in time through the transaction history. Obviously you won't need to visit every single node, but if transactions occur that involve bitcoins that have not moved in many years, you will have to reach back pretty far into that 250 GB stack to verify them. In Ethereum, no. Ethereum has the benifit of transaction pruning, using one of a lot of different implementations of insanely complex algorithms. These algorithms exist in Ethereum and not in Bitcoin because Ethereum, released 2015, had the benefit of six years of hindsight in Bitcoin, releaed 2009. Q: How many transactions run on Bitcoin? How quickly do they clear? A: Bitcoin can process roughly 7 transactions per second. For the purposes of comparison, ethereum can process 15, Ripple can process 1,500. Visa, the credit card, processes 22,000 transactions per second. Transactions have historically taken anywhere between 10 minutes and 8 days to clear, with a rolling average (as of early 2018) of 1 hour. Q: What are transaction fees? A: Transaction fees are fees you pay to perform a transaction. They are generally around 4 dollars, but can be as high as 28 dollars when the transaction volume gets too high. Transaction fees are optional disbursements which point to "the miner". Miners are free to prioritize mining blocks including transactions that paid for priority queueing. Obviously the more powerful the miner, the likelier they are to succeed in mining a block containing the prioritized transaction, the faster the transaction will propogate to other nodes on the network, and the more valuable paying the miner a fee for priority queueing will be. Q: What is the bottleneck? A: Blocks are a certain well-defined size and are only mined in ten minute intervals on average. The 7 transactions per second limit is a fundamental limitation of block size; if the network had a larger block size, throughput would be higher. But it's not possible to change block size after-the-fact. Q: What are some proposed solutions for the network throughput bottleneck? A: This article has a good overview of some ideas. A lot of it seems to come down to building second and third order systems on top of blockchain, which, for small enough dollar amounts and trusted enough users, allow users to perform lookahead transactions without fully committing to the network until later—essentially credit with bitcoin. These systems are known as off-chain solutions. Q: How often is mining difficulty recalibrated? A: Every 2016 blocks. The calculation is made based on a closed-form formula set by design fiat. 