Competitive powerlifting events happen under the auspices of specific federations. As with any aggregate dataset like this one, there are likely to be biases. In this case, some federations do a much better job exposing their data than others. NSF is a Norwegian powerlifting association, and its dominance in the list of included meets indicates this pretty clearly. Unless you're an industry insider these names are otherwise probably pretty uninformative. USAPL stands for "USA Powerlifters". NASA is the "Natural Athlete Strength Association" (and I kind of doubt their choice of acronym is accidental...). For a better reference on what the names mean, see the meetlist. Interestingly enough the dataset has some meets going back pretty far. This dataset is extremely heavily biased towards English-speaking countries in general, the USA specifically, and, weirdly, Norway (I wonder if the person running this website is Norwegian...?). This is going to mostly follow population curves. I would love to believe that red-bellied Texas enjoys its powerlifting way more than blue-bellied California, even though California has way more people total, but given the biases in this dataset, I'm pretty skeptical that holds water. What words are organizers using to describe their powerlifting meets? I enjoy "Raw", "Pro", "Iron", and "Bash". Note how this result is littered with Norwegian words I don't know. =) That about does it for the meets. The real "meat" of the dataset, however, is in the lifts, and the lifters performing them. That's in the openpowerlifting.csv file. For one thing, what's the gender distribution like? You know what? For one of the most testosterone-fueled sports out there, 80-20 is really not that bad. I was expecting worse, more like 90-10. Powerlifters make a big deal these days about lifting "raw", that is, unassisted by hand wraps etcetera which makes it slightly easier to lift the weight (by keeping it aligned for you). This shows in the methods attempted. ...huh. Looks like a lot of powerlifting meet competitors are in their early 20s. This is admitedly not a very well-designed graphic, but it gets the point across. For the Americans in the room, some of the male powerlifters are competiting in 250 pound weight class! These guys are tanks. The maximum female weight class represented in ~200 pounds, while the minimum is a lithe 120 pounds or so. Small but mighty. I'm going to pick my favorite exercise, the squat, and see how I place against powerlifting competitors. I'm 160 lbs and can do my bodyweight, 160 lbs,  as a one-rep max.. Wish me luck! As you can see I, uh, have a long way to go =). That's all folks! Hopefully you enjoyed this short EDA kernel! 