The data comes in two pieces, data.csv (which contains variable indicator records) and documentation.csv (which contains the keys for the variables: description, documentation, and so on. We will join these two chunks of data against one another to get an overall macroeconomic indicator table. This gives us over 800,000 rows of indicator data, with 3380 unique indicators: An individual indicator looks something like this: This particular indicator is yearly, so it contains about 70 or so records, from around 1860 to 1930. Most of the indicators in this dataset are historical, or were created after-the-fact based on one or a handful of "long-haul" sources of economic data. When the data you are interested in occurs over a span of 50 years, or 100 years, or even longer, you're forced to deal with different and evolving standards of reporting and sources for data over time. For that reason there is a great amount of art and science to the building of macroeconomic indicators. In this case, it seems that whatever data sources was being used for building an understanding of crop production cut out roughly where the edges of where this dataset are, so there we stop. Indicator coverage across the entire dataset is: So indicator coverage peaks starts to become good at around 1900, peaks at around 1925, and declines after the 1950s (in this dataset, at least; obviously from the 1950s on our data standards only gets better and better...) And here are the record lengths of the indicators: Indicators tend to report numbers between 0 and 100, then less often 100 and 200, and so on. There's something nice about the roundness of three digits: Remember though that these are indicial values with no units, so they're strictly non-comparable. A quick wordcloud gives us some idea of what the individual indicators are: But you probably will want to search for the ones relevant to your needs directly! Here's one way to do that. Note: a handful of the descriptions are nulled out, so we exclude them manually. Overall, this is a great mix-in dataset for anyone looking at historical economics on Kaggle Datasets. Happy hunting! 