Goibibo is an Indian-based online hotelier company. Like many other hotel-booking sites -- in the United States, hotels.com comes to mind -- it allows users an easy option for comparing hotel prices and going through with booking in one interface. In this notebook we will explore this dataset, a detailed sample of the hotels listed on Goibibo. We will probe the basic dataset attributes and hopefully uncover some interesting effects from the data! This exploratory data analytics notebook is recommended for beginners and those interested in probing this dataset further. Feel free to fork this notebook and/or copy the code here and explore further on your own!  First, cleaning up the data a bit... Let's take a look at some top-level variables, then drill down a little bit into particulars. Site reviews are heavily skewed towards 4 stars. This is actually pretty much standard across every platform on the web that does ratings (relevant XKCD), so no surprise here. Interestingly enough, half of the hotels in the system are 0-rated, e.g. they have no rating assigned at all. While I am not specifically familiar with the Goibibo product, this seems like a bad thing to me -- a hotel's overall rating is very important for making decisions about where to stay. Review counts and room counts are very similar in that they both peak at a couple dozen, with a very long tail of extremely large hotels with much larger numbers of rooms and reviews. It is also extremely possible that some of the review totals are inflated; paid-for reviews are a notorious problem on sites like this, and this phenomenon will probably be especially bad in India. Check out the website for the following hotel, for example, which is the most heavily reviewed one of them all; nothing on its listing seems to particularly justify this fact... Does the distribution of ratings change with the number of stars (1-star, 2-star, etc.) the hotel has? There is a very strong lift that's visible here. 4-star and especially 5-star hotels have significantly better ratings than lower-starred options. As a rule of thumb, staying at a 3-minus-star hotel risks having a terrible experience; staying at a 4-star hotels means you will have at a minimum an unsatisfactory experience (2/5 rating); and staying at a 5-star hotel garuntees you will have at least an ok experience (3/5 rating). Next, let's look at the sentiment and quality of the reviews. Unsurprisingly, positive reviews the norm. 75% of hotels have a 75%-or-better positive review ratio. Reviews with images are the really high-quality reviews, because they involve more work and have more viewership with readers (and are also more effect to falsify BTW). From this plot we see that the percentage of reviews which have images tends to be around 10 to 20 percent or so. Finally, let's see whether or not review ratings differ significantly between the five different review categories: cleanlinesss, location, value for money, food and drink quality, amenities, and service quality (as well as overall quality and the number of stars the hotel has). We see that there is a strong linear relationship amongst all of these variables. The overall hotel rating captures the rating the hotel recieves in each subcategory basically quite well. However, some combinations of categories do have more variance between them than others. For example, cleanliness and location or cleanliness and value for money are relatively weakly correlated, while value for money and amenities or value for money and service quality are relatively strongly correlated. Can you spot any more interesting interactions in this capture? Can you explain why they occur? Anything surprising? The number of hotels in a particular city is strongly, but not totally, dependent on the size of the city in question. For example, the city of Gao, with ~1.5 million residents and a strong tourism industry, has about the same sample size of hotels in this dataset than Bangalore, a city of ~18 million (metro area population). I believe that some of this is due to variance in definitions, regional differences in what platforms hotels in an area use (India is a really big country), and possibly data sampling issues on PromptCloud's end; but we should nevertheless have a reasonable estimate of distribution of hotels in India. The plot below maps them out. Click on a circle to get the name of the represented city; the bigger the circle, the more hotels the city has. Zoom in to see more! Lastly, let's look at whether or not a hotel offering or not offering a specific amenity (explicitly; remember that this field may not be completely accurate!) has an effect on the star rating of the offering. The top amenities are, unsurprisingly, pretty basic. We will stick with looking at these here. (If you want to take a look at the effects of rarer amenities, try forking this notebook and writing that check yourself!) The plot below (TODO: move this) demonstrates that, indeed, amenities can have strong effects on hotel star-ratings. Most surprisingly, having room service is a downward trend, while housekeeping is upwards! This is not due to the amenities themselves -- nobody would rather not have room service then have it -- but rather tells us something about the kinds of hotels these fields get attached to. Perhaps housekeeping is an upgraded version of room service specific to higher-quality hotels! Some results are, on the other hand, more surprising. That's all for here folks! Here are some ideas for further exploration: If you found this notebook helpful, try applying the techniques here to some of the other hotel datasets on Kaggle! What will you find? 