This notebook is an exercise in the Pandas course.  You can reference the tutorial at this link. In this set of exercises we will work with the Wine Reviews dataset. Run the following cell to load your data and some utility functions (including code to check your answers). Look at an overview of your data by running the following line. Select the description column from reviews and assign the result to the variable desc. Follow-up question: what type of object is desc? If you're not sure, you can check by calling Python's type function: type(desc). Select the first value from the description column of reviews, assigning it to variable first_description. Select the first row of data (the first record) from reviews, assigning it to the variable first_row. Select the first 10 values from the description column in reviews, assigning the result to variable first_descriptions. Hint: format your output as a pandas Series. Select the records with index labels 1, 2, 3, 5, and 8, assigning the result to the variable sample_reviews. In other words, generate the following DataFrame:  Create a variable df containing the country, province, region_1, and region_2 columns of the records with the index labels 0, 1, 10, and 100. In other words, generate the following DataFrame:  Create a variable df containing the country and variety columns of the first 100 records. Hint: you may use loc or iloc. When working on the answer this question and the several of the ones that follow, keep the following "gotcha" described in the tutorial: iloc uses the Python stdlib indexing scheme, where the first element of the range is included and the last one excluded. 
loc, meanwhile, indexes inclusively. This is particularly confusing when the DataFrame index is a simple numerical list, e.g. 0,...,1000. In this case df.iloc[0:1000] will return 1000 entries, while df.loc[0:1000] return 1001 of them! To get 1000 elements using loc, you will need to go one lower and ask for df.iloc[0:999]. Create a DataFrame italian_wines containing reviews of wines made in Italy. Hint: reviews.country equals what? Create a DataFrame top_oceania_wines containing all reviews with at least 95 points (out of 100) for wines from Australia or New Zealand. Move on to learn about summary functions and maps. Have questions or comments? Visit the Learn Discussion forum to chat with other Learners. 