Amazon.com needs no introduction --- the ubiquitious shopping platform dominates the online sales market in the United States and in certain parts internationally, and is one of the most important companies in the world. In this notebook we will explore this dataset, a detailed toy products offered and sold on Amazon. We will probe the basic dataset attributes and hopefully uncover some interesting effects from the data! This exploratory data analytics notebook is recommended for beginners and those interested in probing this dataset further. Feel free to fork this notebook and/or copy the code here and explore further on your own!  This dataset includes several columns which compress a lot of data into one field. First of all, let's take a look at the amazon_category_and_sub_category field. This field is the ontological class given to the item in the record within Amazon's database. Amazon separates products out into a diverse range of categories, each subsetted and supersetted by other categories. The design of this ontology is controlled by both buyer concerns (categories need to be obviously useful to a consumer browsing the site and looking for products of a specific kind) and seller concerns (Amazon controls how listing a product on the site works category-by-category). For this reason Amazon splits its categorization up into a tree structure. For example, one valid Amazon product classification is Sports Toys & Outdoor > Beach Toys > Airbeds & Inflating Devices. We need to take a look at how this categorization works to understand how to make use of it. For starters, an item can have a categorical tree with any number of nodes on it. Items with a two-element category and a three-element category are the two most common kinds. The ontology extends as far as five categories; and items can be listed without any category at all as well. I expected the categories to form a tree: every category should have just one possible parent. Surprisingly, this does not hold, because in a couple of cases the sub-categories are duplicitious (as demonstrated below). E.g. Sports Toys & Outdoor > Beach Toys > Beach Toys is legit. Since every product with a classification present has at least two categories in its categorical tree, let's just take the top-level (root) and bottom-level (leaf) categories as new categorical variables, and ignore the stuff in between. What are the most popular and/or valuable leaf-level product categories? When it comes to Amazon toy products, "Vehicles" are the most numerous and by far the most valuable in terms of gross product value. However the runner-up category of "Toys" has the most heavily reviewed items and also by far the highest product value sold. To explore further, let's look at a by-category word cloud. Brands are powerful. Many of the most dominant words in the names of the toy products belong to brands, especially Disney, especially Star Wars. The lumping of categories on Amazon is odd from an end-user perspective. Why do Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtle action figures, prominent in the Science Fiction & Fantasy category, not get lumped into Toys as well? I believe that a difference is drawn between large entertainment brands that license off toy production to consumer toy manufacturers and have a relationship with Amazon on the one hand (mainly Disney), and smaller studios or brand lines owned directly by manufacturers on the other. Still, it's kind of weird. We see here that Vehicles seems to include die-cast cars and scale models that are drivable by children. The latter probably drives the high product value of this category---scale-model cars are an extremely expensive product, one kid-drivable Ferrari might cost as much as 500 action figures! I looked at Educational Games because they have a high number of reviews. Clearly parents are highly involved in rating educational products on Amazon. We'll take the ten most popular leaf categories and take a look at their price distribution. Note that items costing more than 100 pounds have been filtered out of this result to make the view more legible. I've always wondered how much a LEGO set costs. Just for fun, let's build a trivial recommendation engine. We'll pick up the most heavily rated item which is rated over 4 stars, except for when no item matching our description with that high a rating is available, in which case we just return the highest-rated matching item.    That's all here folks! There are a lot of follow-up directions that you can use this dataset and notebook to explore. For example, here are some more things you can try with this dataset: 