
    Suppose that we have a list of phone numbers which we believe corresponds to restaurants in New York City (e.g.
    from the city's 
    restaurant inspection data), and we would like to match those with currently opened locations. That should be
    pretty easy in theory: just download the data into a pandas DataFrame, clean it up a bit, extract the numbers, and push them through the Yelp! Phone Search API.
 
    Or, put another way: we're throwing 27,000 phone numbers of indeterminate quality at a (slow, networked) external
    API whose corner cases we don't immediately understand. Huh? Well, suppose that, in our naivety, our first attempt
    looks like this:
 
    Except it doesn't work. Just 7 seconds in, it throws an error:
 
    Ok, fair enough, it's possible for client.phone_search(num).businesses to be an
    empty list, in cases when Yelp! can't find anything for us. We modify our function to account for this:
 
    And run it again...oops.
 
   Some of the numbers in the list are nulls, which once again does our algorithm in. Another rewrite:
 
    You run the code again. We wait a minute or two, and nothing seems to break, so you drift off to an
    interesting-looking pandas question on Stack Overflow. But after you switch back:
 
    Turns out that if the Yelp! API can find a place, but can't find its location, the Python driver just sets business.location.coordinate to None. Another
    rewrite:
 
    Is that enough? No.
 
    No coordinates and no address means the entire business.location object
    is None. There goes ten minutes of your life (and 1000 cycles of your API rate limit). Fix it and try again:
 
    Done yet? LOL no.
 
    The heck? Nine underscores? Who does that?!?
 
    People, that's who!
 
    At this point, if you're anything like me, you're super frustrated. You've been trying to run this algorithm for
    over an hour, but have gotten stopped along the way every single time. Your unfunc has morphed from a simple
    three-liner to a big 'ol amorphous try-catch block.
 
    It's the end of the day, so you turn off your computer's power saver settings, hit Run once more, turn off the
    moniter, and leave.
 
    The next morning you come back, and here's what you discover:
 
    23720/27064; your script with 90% done, only to explode and lose everything 'cause someone fat-fingered a "." into
    their keypad, somehow, resulting in the wrong number of digits.
 
    To think that all of this could be avoided, were you to just have come up with the completely map function ahead
    of time:
 
    Uhhhhh. Right.
 
    This is a moderately embellished version of a true story. It's true that no one would just run a query this big
    and slow in one go; you'd probably wrap the whole thing in a try-catch block and send it to a list or something.
    Or do what I did and go one uglier, split the job list into batches
    and run those one at a time. However neither of these ideal, because it inflicts a lot of overhead on the
    programmer—and pain and misery on anyone else who has to read the resulting slosh.
 
    So I wrote checkpoints,
    a small module meant to handle that overhead for you.
 
    checkpoints imports new DataFrame.safe_apply and
    Series.safe_map methods, stop-and-start versions of their base operations that
    cache partial results in between runtimes in case an exception is thrown. That means that the next time these
    functions are called, the operation will pick up back where it failed,
    instead of all the way back at the beginning, as we had to do above.
 
    It's a a very simple idea (albeit one that's hard to express idiomatically): save your progress as you go
    along. Try to pick up where you left off after every failure. Never write another
    for loop in anger again!
 
    Head over to the the GitHub repository to learn more.
 