In this notebook I look for features and iteratively add ones that I find that I think have value to an XGBoost model. At the moment only code cells which are not commented out are part of the model definition; code cells which are commented out are explanations of what I found and what I think about it. train contains two columns of interest: phase — each grid write carries electricity along three segments or component wires called "phases". This variable explains which of the three phase is being measured in the given column. This data is directly usable, albeit very low signal: visual inspection of the dataset and natural intuition states that there is very little difference between the phases, which are all just component wires within a larger wire, and hence IID (independently and identically distributed). The phase is encoded using numbers but we will dummy-encode using bits for the purposes of the learner. A simple number is no good because 0 -> 1 -> 2 implies a sorted hierarchy, which doesn't exist in the data, as the wires have no meaningful order. I use the pd.get_dummies utility method to do this. id_measurement — the group id for the grid wire containing the phase in the current record. We can't use this variable directly, as it's a group ID variable. But there is good reason to believe that failures or non-failures within adjacent wires in the group affect the failure of non-failure disposition of the wire in the current record. In other words, I believe (without evidence just yet) that finding potential failure signals in an adjacent wire should bias us towards failing the current wire as well. In other words, I don't think failures are independently distributed. We can use this variable to embed (1) features that are based on all three phases in the grid wire and (2) high-signals features from other wires in the same grid wire. There is a pattern to the distribution of the means. Where does this come from? If you plot some time series or even just look at the raw values you can see that while the individual signals range up and down over the course of time, the sum of the signals for the three phases stays adds up to roughly zero: However the phase triplets are clearly not exactly zero-sum. There are deviations small and large from the mean. Some underlying overall pattern of phase displacement creates the multimodal distribution seen in the mean value KDE plot. What pattern do we see when we plot the  phase triplets directly? It appears that all of the phase sums are normally distributed with roughly mean 0, but some of them are more normal than others. The long tails can get pretty long, since we have 800k samples; this plot cuts off at observations that appear at least five times for legibility. Clearly the variance in the phase group sum varies wildly. If we plot that directly: This plot shows the distribution of the overall variance in the sum of the phases. It looks like a Poisson distribution with a high peak (not quantifiable as high here, but quantifiable as high from the previous array plot) and a long tail. 