 In 2015 the Panama Papers leaked, creating the first (and still biggest) public disclosure into the offshore finance industry to date. The chief target in the Panama leak was Mossack Fonseca, an offshore finance expert which helps large companies and wealthy individuals stash cash abroad. Offshore finance is a vehicle for moving and holding money overseas under favorable, often (though not always) ethnically and legally questionable conditions; the papers have been used to implicate hundreds of politicians in impropriety, even leading to the resignation of the prime minster of Iceland. This dataset is a combination of that disclosure plus two more (the Bahamas Leaks and Offshore Leaks). [...] The Paradise Papers, mentioned in the dataset title, are not yet present in this dataset. It's important to note that on their own, it's not possible to trace any particular financial holdings (e.g. HOTFOCUS CO.) company to any particular  well-known corp (e.g. Uralkali). Doing that tracing (particularly since the records are incomplete) requires very hard journalistic investigation and incorporation document sluething, and deconstructing shell-in-a-shell-in-a-shell company profiles is oftentimes simply impossible by design. Here's a good NPR podcast episode on the subject. This notebook is a basic exploratory data analysis (EDA) of this dataset. Hopefully after reading this notebook you will be well positioned to do your own creative things with the data! To start with, note that this dataset consists of five separate files: The first one we will look at is Entities.csv. Here is, at a high level, what we know about the dataset's cash-stashers: Mossack Fonseca is the most represented of the three named money managers in the dataset, and its files make up the entirety of the Panama Paper leaks. Many files are from an unknown source (the Bahamas leak).  The remainder (from the Offshore Leaks) are from the remaining pair of managers. When it comes to hiding your moeny, your experts are in the Bahamas or the British Virgin Islands (BVI). Some activity flows through Panama (relatively unimportant despite the name). Some other countries show up in the dataset, but the two island nations make up the lion's share of identifiable activity. Home countries are much sparser, as they were a lot harder to identify in the documents. Hong Kong and Switzerland, two traditional places for offshoring money, are the big winners here; but the BVI are not far behind, surprisingly. Let's now turn our attention to the funds themselves. Fund activity in the dataset seems to be trivially correlated with the stock market. The better the year for the world economy, the more activity the offshore entities get. Hence, crashes in 2001 (after the dot-com bubble burst) and 2008 (after the most recent economic downturn). Interestingly funds blink into and out of existence fairly quickly. Most funds do not last 5 years. Next, addresses. These are addresses which got traced or mentioned in the leaked papers, and are the best ballpark estimate we have of who's playing the get the papers game. A huge component of the addresses mentioned in the papers point to Asia: China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Singapore. These four countries account for, by far, the majority of the identifiable or traceable addresses mentioned in the papers! Although the United States, the United Kingdom, and Russia, among others, record signficant activity, they're peanuts compared to the volume of activity in Asia. Finally, let's see what the nationalities of the officers mentioned in the papers are. This measurement basically tallies who is touching the money chain. Most of the people in the leaks cannot be identified to specific countries, but some can be: to China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan especially lead the way, once again. There's still one component of the dataset we haven't touched, but which is definitely the heart of the data. edges.csv is the file linking the various entities we've discussed in the previous EDA sections together: I imagine there are some interesting things that can be found and typified about the offshoring industry by examining the characteristics of the graph you can build between various things. Hopefully this has been helpful reading. I encourage you to upvote and to fork this notebook to help get started with your own analysis. That's all folks! 